We've talked a lot about analytics in this
course and that's the nature of it and
that's the heart of it and
that's what we wanted to emphasize.
But it would be silly and
unwise of us to not emphasize
the organizational challenges
associated with analytics.
I'd go even farther and
claim that effective people analytics.
Is more of an organizational challenge
than an analytics challenge.
So while we emphasize techniques and
principles associated with analytics,
let's leave you with some techniques and
principles associated with
the organizational challenge.
So the main prescription will flow
from the simple idea, one dominant
theme in talking with firms and talking
with the analyst in firms, and that theme
is no black boxes, but we're going to
unpack that and tell you what we mean.
The specific prescriptions that
come from that no black boxes theme
are to be transparent,
to embed yourself, and to share control.
So, we'll unpack each of those to send you
out with some tools you can use on making
sure that you're not just a good analyst
that you're an effective analyst.
So, first be transparent.
So we know quite a bit about the way
decision making is received by those
who are affected by decisions.
There's a long literature
now on procedural fairness,
Joel Brockner has been one of
the leading researchers on that.
And this article, for example,
in the Harvard Business Review
he covers the elements
involved with procedural fairness, and
transparency is one of the main themes.
People are more comfortable with processes
when it is transparent, what is going on.
An organization that's taken
that to heart is Google.
It's one of the main themes in
a recent book by Laszlo Bock,
the head of people operations at Google,
who emphasizes it throughout And
it's critical to their
work on Google Analytics.
An example of the extent to which Google
takes transparency seriously is their
TGIF, their weekly TGIF, which oddly takes
place on Thursday, in a very Google way.
But every Thursday they have a gathering,
originally it was with the two founders,
and often the founders are still there.
Sometimes it's the CEO.
When those guys can't make it at
some very senior executive and
all the employees that can make it
are crowded into one of their cafeterias,
they watch by remotes around the world.
And they can ask the CEOs, the founders,
the senior executives,
anything they want to.
And they do ask all kinds of things,
and the guys stand there,
the women stand there, and they take those
questions, and they give responses, and
it breeds a culture of transparency.
And it emphasizes
the importance the organization
places on transparency and that is
something they believe has helped them
to use analytics more successfully in the
organization because people trust them.
They understand what's going on.
They're more willing to embrace the
analytics that drive the people decisions.
A second prescription that comes
out in this no black boxes theme
is to embed yourself.
And to illustrate this, I wanna start
first with the research of Bob Cialdini
on Influence where he unpack the six
principles that make people persuasive.
And one of those,
one of the most important is liking.
And he decomposed that
further to similarity and
ultimately finding that a fundamental
driver of liking is similarity and
then liking drives influence.
The key point is that people
are more readily influenced by
people they're more similar to.
We may like this, we may dislike this, but
this is human nature and it's an important
lever to pull if you're trying to
influence others in organizations.
So, Chaldini suggests find or
create sources of similarity.
And, an important way to go about that is
to embed yourself in organization you're
trying to influence.
You don't want to be seen as other,
someone on the other side of the wall.
You want to be seen as one of
the people you're trying to influence.
Alec Scheiner is the president
of the Cleveland Browns.
Before that,
he was with the Dallas Cowboys.
He's one of the most influential
executives in professional sports,
certainly within
the National Football League.
Long an advocate of analytics,
he has been fighting the battle of
influencing organizations
through analytics for years now.
And this is how he put it.
He said, embed yourself.
He gave the example,
we hired an analytics guy, Ken Kovash.
He's in the audience here,
I'll show you a picture in a second and
I always tease him because he wears
Browns t-shirts everyday to work and
I'm like you didn't do that at
your old job at Mozilla did you?
You just like wearing t-shirts
to work everyday and pullovers?
But there's a point to it, he's dressing
like our coaches and our scouts and
they feel more comfortable with him.
If he came in everyday in a suit and tie
he'd be like a foreigner in their land,
and I'm gonna hit on this again and again.
If people don't trust you then
they're not gonna listen to you.
They might act like their
listening to you, but they're not.
First you have to build their trust,
and one way to do that is really learn
what they do, and to do that you
just have to embed yourself.
Work near them, go out with them,
see what their day to day is,
see what their challenges are.
That's really what we spend most
of our time worrying about.
So later I got a picture of Kovash and
there he is in his Browns sweatshirt.
Sure enough, being like the coaches,
being like the players.
Right after Shiner gave this comment,
I walked, this was at a conference,
I walked out of the conference and I was
walking alongside another analyst for
another team, and I asked him what
he thought about the session.
And he thought the session was okay.
But he called out exactly this comment.
And this analyst told me, lately
when I've been going from the office
to the playing field to watch practice,
I don't change.
If I change I have to go to the locker
room, it takes me ten minutes,
it slows down my day.
But walking out of that meeting he said,
I'm gonna start changing clothes.
I'm gonna start putting on the sweatshirt,
because it's gonna make me
a more influential analyst.
There's some version of this.
We don't all work for football teams.
We don't all put on sweatshirts.
But there's some version of this that will
make you a better analyst if you figure
out ways to embed yourself with
the size of the organization
you're trying to influence.
Finally, share control.
This is a big one and a hard one for
us especially when you know you have the
right answer because of your analytics,
you still somehow have to
find a way to share control.
On some research I've done with Berkley
Depvorced, a PhD student here at Wharton
and Joseph Simmons, a long time friend and
colleague here at Wharton.
We've found this notion of algorithm
aversion, that people are averse to using
algorithms so often from analytics,
that's what we've come up with,
especially when they see the algorithm's
error which inevitably they will.
So we've done a little bit of research
on this to try to figure out how we can
break it down.
And we find that across
a wide range of tasks,
people prefer judgement, human judgement,
to algorithmic judgement.
This is even true when
algorithms are better.
Even when they know they're better,
they prefer human judgement.
And the main reason for this is that
they're more forgiving of error
by humans than by algorithms,
all of this is challenging.
This is a big challenge for those of us
who are trying to do better analytics,
which inevitably leads to
algorithmic judgement.
So what do you do?
This is the last thing we find.
People are more tolerant of algorithmic
judgement when they have some input,
even when that input is minor.
So we ran a study, I'll show you
quick results from our study,
where we asked people you can
either use a model, algorithm
based on some analytics that have been
done, or you can use human judgement.
But we gave them four
different conditions.
The first, they had to choose
between the model unaltered,
the model as is, as provided by
the analyst or human judgement and
we found that about 47%
wanted to use the model.
This was in a predicted task, the details
of which don't matter right now.
The other three conditions,
we allowed them to take the model and
adjust it a little bit and in every
other respect the study was the same.
So in one of those conditions we
allowed them to adjust it by 10%.
And what happened?
The input, the intake of the model,
the uptake of the model, the interest
in the model went up almost 50%.
From 47% it increased 24
percentage points, to 71%.
Interestingly, so big update by
letting them have participation and
by giving up some control.
Interestingly, we looked
at two other conditions.
Reducing the amount of control that
they had what difference would it make?
If we allowed them to just pay
only five percent what happens?
Still 71% uptake.
What if we restrict their input to
just 2% so they can move the model but
just barely,
what does that do to their intake, uptake?
It doesn't change it.
What we find is as long as
we give them some control,
some input into the final decision,
they're much more willing to lean on
the algorithm, to lean on the model.
This is underscoring this idea of
giving up a little big of control.
Now it might make the algorithm
a little bit worse.
But maybe that's a price we're
paying if it gets the interest in
the algorithm higher.
That's definitely what we've
found in our studies so far.
And we're beginning to use this technique
in our work with organizations.
One example: a local
graduate admissions office,
where we blend experts and analytics.
Three stage process.
And the first stage,
experts evaluate each applicant.
So this is selective judgement.
But in the middle stage we
use the decision model.
Algorithms, we use analytics
to crunch those evaluations
to recommend the optimal class.
That might be where we'd stop, but because
of what we've learned on giving up some
control, we knew there needed
to be a third stage and
in that stage the experts get to review
and revise those recommendations.
So the algorithm doesn't get the final
say, the experts get the final say.
And even if they don't change very
many of those recommendations,
the ability to change, the leeway we give
them makes them much more open and much
more interested in the analytics and the
algorithm that comes from the analytics.
So to wrap up.
On the organizational challenge side, the
major theme is don't make it a black box.
No black boxes and in particular
be transparent, embed yourself in
the organizations and as much as it
might hurt you to do so, share control.
You'll be a more effective
analyst if you do.